The Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoranda on the Maya Calendars Used in the
Books of Chilan Balam, by Charles P. Bowditch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Memoranda on the Maya Calendars Used in the Books of Chilan Balam

Author: Charles P. Bowditch

Release Date: May 12, 2012 [EBook #39683]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORANDA ON THE MAYA ***




Produced by Julia Miller, Paula Franzini and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                     MEMORANDA ON THE MAYA CALENDARS
                           USED IN THE BOOKS OF
                               CHILAN BALAM

                                    BY
                           CHARLES P. BOWDITCH

 (From the American Anthropologist (N. S.), Vol. 3, January-March, 1901)

                                 NEW YORK
                           G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
                                   1901




    MEMORANDA ON THE MAYA CALENDARS USED IN THE BOOKS OF CHILAN BALAM

                         BY CHARLES P. BOWDITCH


Dr Brinton, in his _Maya Chronicles_, has translated the following
passages from the Book of Chilan Balam of Mani:

    ... in the thirteenth Ahau Ahpula died; for six years the count of
    the thirteenth Ahau will not be ended; the count of the year was
    toward the East, the month Pop began with (the day) fourth Kan; the
    eighteenth day of the month Zip (that is) 9 Ymix, was the day on
    which Ahpula died; and that the count may be known in numbers and
    years, it was the year 1536.

And again from the Book of Chilan Balam of Tizimin:

    The thirteenth Ahau; the death of Ahpulha took place; it was the
    sixth year when ended the count of the thirteenth Ahau,--the count
    of the year was from the east (the month) Pop passed on the fourth
    Kan; on the eighteenth of (the month) Zip, 9 Imix was the day
    Ahpulha died; it was the year 1536.

In his remarks on these books Dr Brinton says:

    According to the reckoning as it now stands, six complete great
    cycles were counted, and parts of two others, so that the native at
    the time of the Conquest would have had eight great cycles to
    distinguish apart.

    I have not found any clear explanation how this was accomplished.
    We do not even know what name was given to this great cycle,[1] nor
    whether the calendar was sufficiently perfected to prevent
    confusion in dates in the remote past.

  [1] It should be noted that the grand cycle, which Dr Brinton refers
  to, is the period of 13 x 7200 days = 93,600 days or 260 periods of
  360 days; while the grand cycle according to Goodman's method is 13
  x 144,000 days or 5200 periods of 360 days.

It would seem, however, as if the reckoning of time as given in these
books is very accurate, fixing a date which would not be duplicated
within a limit of thirty-five hundred or four thousand years.

The Books of Chilan Balam number the katuns on a different principle
from that used on the inscriptions or in the Dresden Codex, but the two
methods can be readily and usefully brought together, as the katun
itself remains the same in both methods. In the inscriptions the katuns
are numbered from 0 to 19, using Goodman's method though not his exact
nomenclature, and twenty of them equal one cycle. In the Chilan Balam
books, the katuns are named as Katun 13 Ahau, Katun 11 Ahau, etc., these
being the days with which they begin or with which the previous katun
ended; and as after thirteen katuns the same name is again given, this
nomenclature fixes a date within a period which equals 13 multiplied by
the number of days in a katun. There has been a difference of opinion as
to this number of days in a katun, but it is clear from the Books of
Chilan Balam that their reckoning was by terms of 20 x 360 days. The
followers of Perez, however, insist that the length of the katun was 24
x 365 days. Sr Perez has indeed made this assertion,[2] but he rests his
opinion to a great degree on the fact that the naming of the katuns
proceeded in the following order, taking their names from the day Ahau
with which they began, viz.:

    Katun 13 Ahau,
    Katun 11 Ahau,
    Katun  9 Ahau,
    Katun  7 Ahau, etc.,

and that by starting with a katun which begins with 13 Ahau and counting
forward a period of 24 x 365 days, we should reach another katun
beginning with 11 Ahau. But the same result is brought about by
considering the katun as a period of 20 x 360 days, as has been shown by
Dr Seler, among others; and since the Books of Chilan Balam state
distinctly that they reckon by so many scores of so-called years, and
as the initial dates of the inscriptions all reckon in the same way, it
is now generally considered that the katun consisted of 20 x 360 or 7200
days. An objection to considering a katun as 20 x 360 days may be raised
in that the Books of Chilan Balam use the word "ano" or year, but this
can be easily explained by the fact that the Spanish "year" was the
period which most nearly agreed with their tun or 360-day period, and
that the Books did not pretend to speak with scientific accuracy.

  [2] Stephens, _Incidents of Travel in Yucatan_, p. 441 et seq.

Besides the above count, it is well known that the Mayas had a
year-and-month count. This consisted in naming each one of the twenty
days and in attaching to each of these days one of the numbers 1 to 13.
Besides this, each day so numbered was declared to be a given day of a
given month and to occur in a year marked by one of the year bearers--as
for instance in the Book of Chilan Balam, already quoted, where the day
is given as 9 Ymix 18 Zip in the year 4 Kan. Now this day and this year
could recur only after the lapse of fifty-two years or 18,980 days.

It should be noted here that in the inscriptions and in the Dresden
Codex, the day Ymix was always the day 4, 9, 14, or 19 of any month,
showing that the day 1 of the month was Eznab, Akbal, Lamat, or Ben;
while in Landa and the Books of Chilan Balam the day Ymix was the day 3,
8, 13, or 18, showing that the day 1 of the month was Cauac, Kan, Muluc,
or Ix. That is, the months in modern times began with the day which
followed the day with which the months began in more ancient times. As
the tables are calculated for the inscriptions, it will be well, in
order to facilitate our calculations, to call the day on which Ahpula
died the nineteenth of the month Zip, instead of the eighteenth of that
month.

Given that the katun consisted of 7200 days, a Katun 13 Ahau could not
recur until after the lapse of 13 x 7200 or 93,600 days, and the
recurrence of any day marked by the year-and-month count, and occupying
any particular place in a given katun, could not occur until after the
lapse of a period which is found by finding the least common multiple of
the two numbers 93,600 and 18,980. This is 6,832,800 days, which is a
period of 360 calendar rounds of 18,980 days or of 52 years each. This
is equal to 18,720 years, and, in the method of reckoning shown in the
initial dates of the inscriptions, would equal 3 grand cycles, 8 cycles,
and 9 katuns, or, to use the method of Goodman, 3.8.9.0.0.0.

I have said that a day marked by the year-and-month count, and occupying
any particular place in a given katun, could not recur until the lapse
of this long period. This would be true if the day was specified as
being a given day in a given tun in a given katun, or even if the day
was stated as falling in a given uinal of a given tun in a given katun.
But in the case before us the death of Ahpula is said to have taken
place in the Katun 13 Ahau when six tuns or years of that katun remained
unexpired. Even with this rather loose designation such a day would not
recur within a period of 3500 or 4000 years.

The day 4 Ahau 8 Cumhu seems to have been regarded as the beginning day
of the beginning cycle of some grand cycle. From this day all the
initial series of the inscriptions of Copan and Quirigua, of Piedras
Negras and Tikal, so far as we know them, count, except one where this
day 4 Ahau 8 Cumhu is itself given. In this place (on Stela C of
Quirigua) 4 Ahau 8 Cumhu is reckoned thus: "Grand cycle glyph
.13.0.0.0.0.", while in the Temple of the Cross it is declared to be a
thirteenth cycle. As this was the beginning date, there is reason to
believe that the beginning cycle of a great cycle received the number
13.

I give here the first and last terms of a list of the beginning days of
the Katuns 13 Ahau in a complete round of 18,720 years occurring after
the beginning of the grand cycle called by Goodman Grand Cycle 54, which
began with 4 Ahau 8 Cumhu. It is of little consequence what particular
number is given to the grand cycle, as the whole series forms a
continuous count, and I shall therefore follow Goodman, who gives the
number 54 to the grand cycle glyphs common to Copan, Quirigua, etc.

If 54.13.0.0.0.0. or the beginning of the grand cycle, called Grand
Cycle 54 by Goodman, begins with 4 Ahau 8 Cumhu, a Katun 13 Ahau will
appear two katuns after this or with the count of

    54.13.2.0.0.0.     13 Ahau 8 Mol       Year 10 Ix,

and other Katuns 13 Ahau will follow at intervals of 13 katuns as here
given:

    54.13.15.0.0.0.    13 Ahau  8 Pax      Year  6 Ix.
        1. 8.              "    3 Xul            3 Cauac.
        2. 1.              "    3 Kankin        12  "

     .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .   .   .

    57.5.19.0.0.0.     13 Ahau 18 Ceh           11 Kan.
       6.12                    13 Uo             8 Muluc.
       7. 5.                   13 Yax            4  "
         18.                   13 Cumhu         13  "
    57.8.11.0.0.0.     13 Ahau  8 Mol           10 Ix.

But we are seeking a Katun 13 Ahau in which 14 tuns have elapsed and of
which 6 tuns still remain unexpired. We must, therefore, add 14 tuns or
14 x 360 days = 5040 days to each of the dates given and we shall then
have the following complete list of the beginning days of Tun 14 of
Katun 13 Ahau for the term of 18,720 years:

    54.13. 2.14.0.0.    9 Ahau 18 Zotz          11 Kan.
          15.                  18 Ceh            7 Kan.
        1. 8.                  13 Uo             4 Muluc.
        2. 1.                  13 Yax           13 Muluc.
          14.                  13 Cumhu          9 Muluc.
        3. 7.                   8 Mol            6 Ix.
        4. 0.                   8 Pax            2 Ix.
          13.                   3 Xul           12 Cauac.
        5. 6.                   3 Kankin         8 Cauac.
          19.                  18 Zip            5 Kan.
        6.12.                  18 Zac            1 Kan.
        7. 5.                  13 Pop           11 Muluc.
          18.                  13 Chen           7 Muluc.
    54. 8.11.14.0.0.           13 Kayab          3 Muluc.
        9. 4.                   8 Yaxkin        13 Ix.
          17.                   8 Muan           9 Ix.
       10.10.                   3 Tzec           6 Cauac.
       11. 3.                   3 Mac            2 Cauac.
          16.                  18 Uo            12 Kan.
       12. 9.                  18 Yax            8 Kan.
    55.13. 2.14.0.0.           18 Cumhu          4 Kan.
                                                --------
          15.                  13 Mol            1 Muluc.
        1. 8.                  13 Pax           10 Muluc.
        2. 1.                   8 Xul            7 Ix.
          14.                   8 Kankin         3 Ix.
        3. 7.                   3 Zotz          13 Cauac.
        4. 0.                   3 Ceh            9 Cauac.
          13.                  18 Pop            6 Kan.
        5. 6.                  18 Chen           2 Kan.
        5.19.                  18 Kayab         11 Kan.
        6.12.                  13 Yaxkin         8 Muluc.
        7. 5.                  13 Muan           4 Muluc.
          18.                   8 Tzec           1 Ix.
        8.11.                   8 Mac           10 Ix.
        9. 4.                   3 Zip            7 Cauac.
          17.                   3 Zac            3 Cauac.
                                                --------
       10.10.                   3 Uayeb         12 Cauac.
       11.03.                  18 Mol            9 Kan.
          16.                  18 Pax            5 Kan.
       12. 9.                  13 Xul            2 Muluc.
    56.13. 2.14.0.0.           13 Kankin        11 Muluc.
          15.                   8 Zotz           8 Ix.
        1. 8.                   8 Ceh            4 Ix.
        2. 1.                   3 Uo             1 Cauac.
          14.                   3 Yax           10 Cauac.
        3. 7.                   3 Cumhu          6 Cauac.
        4. 0.                  18 Yaxkin         3 Kan.
          13.                  18 Muan          12 Kan.
        5. 6.                  13 Tzec           9 Muluc.
        5.19.                  13 Mac            5 Muluc.
        6.12.                   8 Zip            2 Ix.
         7.5.                   8 Zac           11 Ix.
          18.                   3 Pop            8 Cauac.
        8.11.                   3 Chen           4 Cauac.
        9. 4.                   3 Kayab         13 Cauac.
          17.                  18 Xul           10 Kan.
       10.10.                  18 Kankin         6 Kan.
       11.03.                  13 Zotz           3 Muluc.
          16.                  13 Ceh            12 Muluc.
       12. 9.                   8 Uo             9 Ix.
    57.13. 2.14.0.0.            8 Yax            5 Ix.
          15.                   8 Cumhu          1 Ix.
        1. 8.                   3 Mol           11 Cauac.
        2. 1.                   3 Pax            7 Cauac.
          14.                  18 Tzec           4 Kan.
                                                --------
        3. 7.                  18 Mac           13 Kan.
        4. 0.                  13 Zip           10 Muluc.
        4.13.                  13 Zac            6 Muluc.
        5. 6.                   8 Pop            3 Ix.
        5.19.                   8 Chen          12 Ix.
        6.12.                   8 Kayab          8 Ix.
        7. 5.                   3 Yaxkin         5 Cauac.
          18.                   3 Muan           1 Cauac.
        8.11.                  18 Zotz          11 Kan.

The only places where a year 4 Kan appears are at the dates

    55.13. 2.14.0.0.[3]     9 Ahau 18 Cumhu     Year 4 Kan, and
    57. 2.14.14.0.0.        9 Ahau 18 Tzec      Year 4 Kan.

But as the words used are that 6 years (or tuns) remained before the end
of the katun, and as a slightly longer time than just 6 tuns may have
remained, and as the month Zip in which the death of Ahpula occurred is
the third month of the year and so is near the beginning of the year 4
Kan, it is quite possible that the beginning of the Tun 14 may have been
in the latter part of the preceding year, in which case, in addition to
the preceding dates, the following date might be the one which we are
seeking:

    55. 9.17.14.0.0.        9 Ahau 3 Zac        Year 3 Cauac.

  [3] It is necessary to remember that, by Goodman's methods, these
  figures represent periods of past time. Thus the number 2 of the katun
  means that 2 katuns have passed, and that the current katun is what we
  should call the third; and that 0.0 means that a full count of uinals
  and kins has occurred and that the current uinal and kin are what we
  should call the first.

As 9 Ymix 19 Zip is said to be in the year 4 Kan, we shall find this
date before the dates of the beginning of Tun 14 in the first two cases
and after the beginning of Tun 14 in the last case. This date of 9 Ymix
19 Zip will then be numbered thus, placing the three dates in
consecutive order:

    1) 55.13. 2.13. 3. 1.      6 tuns 299 days to end of Katun 13 Ahau.
    2) 55. 9.17.14.11. 1.      5  "   139   "      "       "     "
    3) 57. 2.14.13.16. 1.      6  "    39   "      "       "     "

In no one of the cases is the date 9 Ymix 19 Zip exactly 6 tuns before
the end of the Katun 13 Ahau, but it is possible that the annalist took
no account of fractions of tuns, either in excess of the 6 tuns or
otherwise. Thus in the first and last cases of the three, as first
given, he may have said to himself, "There are but 6 whole tuns
remaining of the katun and I will call it 6," or in the second case he
may have said: "There are 5 tuns remaining and 139 days besides; I will
call it 6 tuns." Whichever was the plan he followed, we can have at
present no means of ascertaining except from the results which we obtain
by calculation.

The date found on Stela 9 of Copan, which is the earliest date of these
stelae of that place, in which the numbers preceding the period glyphs
are given by the line-and-dot method, is 54.9.6.10.0.0. This precedes
the above dates by the following periods:

    1) 0.3.16.3. 3.1. =   548,341 days =  1,502 years 111 days.
    2) 1.0.11.4.11.1  = 1,952,861  "   =  5,350   "    14  "
    3) 2.6. 8.3.16.1  = 4,667,001  "   = 12,786   "   111  "

If, now, we accept the first date of 55.13.2.13.3.1. as the date of
Ahpula's death, we shall have the date of Stela 9 of Copan as A.D. 34,
since the death occurred in 1536. If we accept the second date,
55.9.17.14.11.1., as the true one, Stela 9 must represent a date of B.C.
3814, and in the case of the third date, 57.2.14.13.16.1. in which the
period to elapse to the end of Katun 13 Ahau is the nearest to an exact
6 tuns, we should throw back Copan to B.C. 11,250. It is not probable,
however, that either of the last two dates is correct, both because of
the immense time which would have elapsed and because the monuments show
signs of no such age. We are therefore left to the date A.D. 34 as the
probable date of the earliest stela of Copan which we know of at
present.

The following table gives the earliest and latest dates in Copan and
Quirigua as far as we know them, together with the dates of our calendar
corresponding thereto, on the supposition that the above date is rightly
deciphered:

 Copan:   Stela 9, 9. 6.10.0.0                                  A.D.  34.
            "   N, 9.16.10.0.0 = 197  years later than A.D. 34  A.D. 231.
 Quirigua:  "   C, 9. 1. 0.0.0 = 108 +  "  earlier  "   "  say  B.C.  75.
            "   K, 9.18.15.0.0 = 241 +  "   later   "   "       A.D. 275.

If this is correct, Copan lasted, so far as the erection of stelae is
concerned, for about 200 years, and Quirigua for about 350 years, though
of course this may be only a small part of the period of their
existence.

The above calculations have been made on the supposition that the
initial dates record the date of the erection of the stelae, and on the
further supposition, as has been stated, that the same principle of
calculating time has been continued from the earliest ages. There is,
however, some evidence that a change has been made, at least in detail.
It has already been seen that the beginning day of the month has been
shifted from the Eznab, Akbal series to the Cauac, Kan series of days.
What difference this would have made in the relation of the
year-and-month count with the long count it is impossible to say without
knowing the means used to effect the change; but it is quite likely that
this relation was not affected. In the Book of Chilan Balam of Mani is
the entry: "The Thirteenth Ahau; then Pop was counted in order." And in
the Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel we find, "The Thirteenth Ahau; Pop
was set in order." This statement occurs in the early part of the
chronicle, and the calculation of the Ahaus goes on after it in exactly
the same way as before it. This setting in order of Pop would not then
seem to have made any difference in the long count. At least it is very
probable that it means merely that the seasons and the calendar were
made to agree.

Dr Brinton (_Maya Chronicles_, p. 85) also gives a translation of a part
of the Codice Perez, which refers to the "Doubling of the Katuns." The
statement is very obscure, but only tends to show that while the
counting of the katuns was carried on as in the Books of Chilan Balam,
the first of the series was called Katun 8 Ahau instead of Katun 13
Ahau, while the last of the series was Katun 10 Ahau. This would not
necessarily change the consecutive order of the katuns, but might merely
give a new starting-point.

While, therefore, it is impossible to say what change, if any, was made
in the reckoning of time, it may be said that there is no evidence at
present to show that the old relation of the long count to the
year-and-month count and to the count of the Books of Chilan Balam did
not continue to the time of the arrival of the Spaniards. Moreover, the
date of A.D. 34 for the monuments of Copan and Quirigua is by no means
unlikely to be the true one. At all events the above discussion of the
reckoning will not be useless if it succeeds in bringing out new facts,
and no one will be more ready to recognize any new evidence than I shall
be, even if the above deductions shall be shown to be erroneous.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

In general every effort has been made to replicate the original text as
faithfully as possible, including some instances of inconsistencies of
spelling (Ahpula/Ahpulha; Ymix/Imix) and possible irregularities in the
use of commas and periods in Mayan dates.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoranda on the Maya Calendars Used
in the Books of Chilan Balam, by Charles P. Bowditch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORANDA ON THE MAYA ***

***** This file should be named 39683.txt or 39683.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/6/8/39683/

Produced by Julia Miller, Paula Franzini and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
